ChatGPT Pro

















there was a very recent improvement to hashing announced.  Can you find and explain it?

If you mean the announcement from the last few days, I think you're referring to BinaryPC, a new hashing-based attention mechanism for LLMs rather than a new cryptographic hash function. It was published on arXiv on August 5, 2026. 

For someone interested in LLM inference and sw-MLPL, this is actually much more interesting than it sounds.

The problem it addresses
Long-context LLM inference spends an enormous amount of time searching the KV cache.

For every new generated token:

new query
     │
     ▼
compare against
K1 K2 K3 K4 ... K500000
Even with FlashAttention, you're still performing attention over a huge number of keys.

The observation is:

Most keys are irrelevant.

If you could quickly find only the few hundred keys likely to matter, inference becomes dramatically faster.

Existing approaches
Several approaches already exist:

Sliding-window attention

Block-sparse attention

Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH)

Learned sparse attention

Retrieval-based attention

Each has drawbacks:

loses accuracy

requires retraining

expensive hashing

random projections don't match the actual data

BinaryPC's idea
Instead of random hashes, it computes binary principal components of the KV vectors.

Conceptually:

original vectors

      ●
   ●      ●

 ●            ●

 ↓ PCA

principal directions

 ↓

convert sign bits

10110101
11110100
00011110
...
Vectors with similar meaning produce similar binary codes.

Then lookup becomes

hash(query)

↓

bucket 57

↓

compare against only
200 vectors

instead of

500,000 vectors
The authors describe it as training-free because the hash functions are derived directly from the data rather than learned through gradient descent. 

Why this matters
According to the paper:

no model retraining

preserves long-context accuracy much better than previous sparse attention methods

approximately 3.56× decoding throughput compared with FlashAttention in their reported GPU experiments. 

That is a substantial claim if it generalizes.

Why I think this is especially relevant to your interests
You've been exploring:

CPU inference

older GPUs

speculative decoding

MTP

edge devices

FPGA inference

hierarchical reasoning

This fits extremely well.

Memory bandwidth—not arithmetic—is often the bottleneck during decoding.

BinaryPC attempts to reduce memory traffic, not just FLOPs.

That means:

Old GPU

less VRAM traffic
↓

higher effective throughput

↓

better tokens/sec
Even CPUs may benefit because cache locality improves.

Relation to speculative decoding
These are complementary.

You could imagine:

draft model
        │
        ▼
BinaryPC sparse attention
        │
        ▼
target model
Speculative decoding reduces the number of expensive forward passes.

BinaryPC reduces the cost of each forward pass.

Together, the speedups could multiply rather than merely add.

Relation to your FPGA ideas
One thing that struck me while reading the abstract is that BinaryPC converts high-dimensional vectors into compact binary codes.

Binary operations map very naturally onto FPGA hardware.

A possible pipeline would be:

Query vector

↓

binary projection

↓

hash lookup

↓

small SRAM bucket

↓

attention
instead of streaming an enormous KV cache through memory.

This is conceptually much closer to hardware associative memories than traditional dense attention.

Relation to Engram / mHC concepts
You've been discussing:

Engrams

mHC

hierarchical memories

BinaryPC is effectively creating an index over memory rather than scanning all memory.

That is philosophically similar to biological recall:

cue

↓

memory index

↓

candidate memories

↓

detailed comparison
instead of

cue

↓

compare with every stored memory
I suspect there is fertile ground combining these ideas.

Should sw-MLPL support this?
I think yes.

Rather than exposing "BinaryPC" specifically, I'd expose the abstraction:

attention sparse binarypc
attention sparse lsh
attention sparse block
attention dense
Then the runtime chooses the implementation.

That would let people experiment with different sparse attention algorithms without changing model code.

I'd recommend reading it carefully
This is one of the more interesting inference papers I've seen recently because it:

doesn't require retraining,

targets the real bottleneck (KV-cache lookup),

reports significant throughput improvements,

appears implementable in multiple runtimes (CUDA, MLX, CPU, FPGA),

aligns well with your interest in making smaller hardware much more capable. 

I'd be happy to go beyond the abstract and walk through the actual algorithm, including the math behind the binary principal components, the indexing data structures, and how one could implement a Rust/MLX or Rust/CUDA version suitable for integration into sw-MLPL.


This is helpful, but even more recent than I was thinking of.  I think there was an announcement this year of a breakthrough new hashing algorithm (or new hash-map implementation).  I wish I could remember more about it, maybe it used randomness somehow?  Maybe it had a bunch of pointers (like up, down, left, right) vaguely recall a diagram with arrows.

I think I know exactly what you're remembering.

The clues:

this year (2025)

major breakthrough

hash tables rather than cryptographic hashes

randomness plays a central role

diagram full of arrows/pointers

lots of discussion in the algorithms community

strongly suggest it was the new hash table result by William Kuszmaul and collaborators, which overturned a long-standing theoretical assumption. It was covered by Quanta Magazine under the headline "Undergraduate Upends a 40-Year-Old Data Science Conjecture." 

The picture with many arrows/pointers that you remember is probably this one:

Tiny pointers connecting elements into miniature pointer structures inside the hash table.

Quanta even describes the illustration as:

"Tiny pointers ... inspired the creation of a new kind of faster hash table." 

The breakthrough
For roughly 40 years, researchers believed there was a fundamental tradeoff:

very fast lookup

high load factor

little memory overhead

You could pick at most two.

The new work shows that this tradeoff was not actually fundamental.

Instead, by organizing entries with very small randomized pointer structures, they obtain much stronger guarantees simultaneously. 

Why randomness matters
Traditional hash tables use randomness only here:

key
  ↓
hash function
  ↓
bucket
After that, collisions are handled mechanically.

The newer ideas use randomness inside the table organization itself.

Instead of

bucket

A
B
C
they build tiny randomized navigation structures.

Conceptually:

      A
     ↙ ↘
    B   C
   ↘   ↙
      D
The actual structures are much more sophisticated, but the important idea is that a lookup follows only a handful of tiny pointer hops.

Tiny pointers
The really clever observation is:

A pointer doesn't have to be 64 bits.

If everything it points to is nearby, perhaps it only needs

6 bits

7 bits

8 bits

or another very small encoding.

Instead of

64-bit pointer
they store

8-bit offset
or similarly compact metadata.

That saves enormous amounts of memory while improving cache locality. 

Then came TPHT
The theoretical work has already inspired practical implementations.

Just last week there was a paper called Tiny Pointer Hash Tables (TPHT).

It introduces two implementations:

Chained-TPHT

Flattened-TPHT

using compressed pointers to achieve both higher throughput and dramatically lower memory usage. The authors report up to 89% higher throughput than strong baselines while remaining extremely space efficient. 

So there's a progression:

2025
↓

new theory
(tiny pointers)

↓

2026

practical TPHT implementation
Could it instead have been Iceberg Hashing?
Another possibility is Iceberg Hashing, announced toward the end of 2025.

It also attracted a lot of attention because it simultaneously achieved

high load factors

strong theoretical guarantees

fast operations

and is intended as a production-quality hash table. 

Or Adaptive Hashing?
There was also Adaptive Hashing this year.

Instead of fixing the hash function forever, the table changes the hash function online to match the observed key distribution.

That's another example where randomness is actively used rather than being a one-time decision. 

My guess
Based on your recollection of:

arrows,

lots of little pointers,

randomness,

"major breakthrough",

I'd rank them:

The 2025 tiny-pointer hash table breakthrough (very likely) 

Tiny Pointer Hash Tables (TPHT) practical implementation (also likely if you saw a recent conference paper) 

Iceberg Hashing 

Adaptive Hashing 

One thing caught my eye: you mentioned "up, down, left, right" arrows. That sounds less like a conventional hash table diagram and more like a skip list, treap, or another randomized pointer structure. Those data structures are built from coin flips and multiple pointer levels, and the new tiny-pointer work borrows some of that flavor by representing relationships with compact pointer metadata. If you remember the diagram looking almost like a miniature graph rather than buckets in an array, that further points toward the tiny-pointer work rather than a new hash function itself.

If you're interested, I can also explain why this result is exciting from a systems perspective—in particular why it could plausibly influence future implementations of Rust's HashMap, hashbrown, Abseil's Swiss Table, and even LLM KV-cache indexing.


Yes "Undergraduate Upends a 40-Year-Old Data Science Conjecture" is what I was looking for but the others you mentioned are also intersting.  Note that your "this year" is 2025, but my "this year" is 2026, but your first result is what I want.  So how do all of these fit into helping sw-MLPL show completeness as a general-purpose language?  Which of these make for interesting demos in sw-mlpl?  Does sw-mlpl need enhancements in order to implement any of these?  Would these be worth adding to demo-algorithms (vs. demo-combinators or demo-functional-pipelines)?

I think these are excellent candidates for sw-MLPL, but not primarily because they're "better hash tables."

They're excellent because they demonstrate that sw-MLPL is a systems language capable of expressing cutting-edge algorithms, not merely an ML DSL.

One thing I'd change in your project organization is how you classify them.

I would create a fourth demo category
Instead of putting these under demo-algorithms, I'd consider something like:

demo-functional-pipelines/
demo-combinators/
demo-algorithms/
demo-systems/
where demo-systems showcases data structures and algorithms that production runtimes depend on.

Examples:

SwissTable

Robin Hood hashing

Cuckoo hashing

Iceberg hashing

Tiny Pointer hash tables

Skip lists

B-trees

Radix trees

Lock-free queues

Arena allocators

Slab allocators

Rope strings

Bloom filters

HyperLogLog

This tells people:

"Yes, sw-MLPL is an ML language—but it's also a serious programming language."

I think these demos fit together surprisingly well
I'd build a progression.

Level 1 — Classical
Linear probing
Quadratic probing
Separate chaining
Robin Hood
Cuckoo
Hopscotch
These are familiar to most CS graduates.

Level 2 — Modern production
SwissTable
hashbrown
Abseil
F14
Now you're demonstrating techniques used in real compilers and runtimes.

Level 3 — Current research
Iceberg
Tiny Pointer
TPHT
Adaptive Hashing
Now sw-MLPL starts looking like a research platform.

Why this is valuable
Suppose someone asks

"Can sw-MLPL express modern systems algorithms?"

Instead of saying yes...

...you point them to

demo-systems/hash/
with 12 implementations.

That is extremely persuasive.

These are especially interesting because...
They use ideas that appear elsewhere.

For example...

Tiny Pointer Hash Tables involve

compact encodings

graph traversal

pointer compression

cache locality

probabilistic analysis

Those are useful concepts outside hash tables.

Which language features are required?
Surprisingly few.

I think your existing language already has almost everything.

You'll mainly want:

1. Packed structs
For example

struct Node {
    byte pointer
    byte metadata
    int key
}
rather than wasting alignment.

Rust has

#[repr(packed)]
sw-MLPL should probably expose something similar.

2. Bit fields
These papers constantly manipulate

00010110
rather than

int
I'd want syntax like

bits8
bits16
bits32
and extraction operators.

3. Cache-aware arrays
Instead of

list<Node>
I'd like

packed<Node>
or

cacheline<Node>
This becomes useful later for ML kernels too.

4. Small integers
These papers love

u8
u12
u14
because every byte matters.

5. Explicit randomness
Adaptive hashing and many randomized structures become much nicer if randomness is a first-class concept.

Something like

sample
shuffle
seed
rng
rather than calling external libraries.

One thing I would not add
I would not add pointer arithmetic.

Instead I'd expose

offset
index
handle
Objects.

That fits your higher-level philosophy much better.

A more interesting opportunity
I think these algorithms reveal a gap in most languages.

Most languages have

Map
Set
Vector
but don't expose why one implementation differs from another.

Imagine instead

map robinhood
map cuckoo
map swiss
map iceberg
map tinypointer
or

Map<
    hashing = TinyPointer,
    load = 0.97
>
The implementation becomes a parameter.

That would be a neat sw-MLPL feature.

Even better...
I think the demos should measure themselves.

Every demo should report

Insert/sec
Lookup/sec
Delete/sec
Memory
Bytes/key
Cache misses
Load factor
Collisions
Probe lengths
Latency histogram
Then users can compare

Swiss

vs

Robin Hood

vs

Tiny Pointer

vs

Iceberg
on the same workload.

That becomes a benchmark suite, not merely sample code.

This connects directly to your ML goals
This is the part I find most exciting.

You've been thinking about:

Engrams

mHC

associative memory

MTP

sparse attention

KV caches

FPGA implementations

All of these are fundamentally memory organization problems.

The same questions arise:

How do I find the right item quickly?

How much metadata do I need?

How can I improve cache locality?

How can I compress pointers or indices?

How much randomness should I use?

How close to full can the structure get before performance collapses?

The new hash-table work is about answering those questions for key-value stores, while recent sparse-attention work like BinaryPC answers similar questions for neural memory by indexing instead of exhaustively scanning. 

Because of that, I'd actually prioritize a demo-memory/ collection over demo-systems/, with sections like:

demo-memory/
    hash/
    cache/
    bloom/
    lru/
    kv/
    attention/
    retrieval/
That framing creates a bridge between classical computer science and modern machine learning. Someone exploring sw-MLPL could start with a Robin Hood hash table, progress to Tiny Pointer Hash Tables, and eventually arrive at sparse-attention indexes and KV-cache acceleration, all while using the same language and runtime concepts. For the audience you're targeting, that's a much stronger story than presenting them as isolated algorithms. 


